Beta PR 2 of 2: delimited serialization (#97)
UAVCAN/specification: specification/dsdl/serializable_types.tex

For any serializable type,
its \emph{alignment} $A$ is defined as some positive integer number of bits such that the offset of a
serialized representation of an instance of this type relative to the origin of the
containing serialized representation (if any) is an integer multiple of $A$.

Given an instance of type whose alignment is $A$,
it is guaranteed that its serialized representation is always an integer multiple of $A$ bits long.

When constructing a serialized representation,
the alignment and length requirements are satisfied by means of \emph{padding},
which refers to the extension of a bit sequence with zero bits until
the resulting alignment or length requirements are satisfied.
During deserialization, the padding bits are ignored (skipped) irrespective of their value
(also see related section \ref{sec:dsdl_serialization_implicit_truncation}).

\begin{remark}
    For example, given a variable-length entity whose length varies between 1 and 3 bits,
    followed by a field whose type has the alignment requirement of 8,
    one may end up with 5, 6, or 7 bits of padding inserted before the second field at runtime.

>     The exact amount of such padding cannot always be determined statically because it depends on a runtime value;

Reviewer: Much better. Thanks

\end{itemize}
If neither of the above prefixes are provided, the resultant definition is that of a fixed-length array.

The alignment of an array equals the alignment of its element type\footnote{
    E.g., the alignment of \texttt{uint5[<=3]} or \texttt{int64[3]} is 1 bit (that is, no alignment).
}.

\subsection{Composite types}\label{sec:dsdl_composite_types}

\subsubsection{Kinds}

There are two kinds of composite type definitions: message types and service types.
All versions of a data type shall be of the same kind\footnote{%
    For example, if a data type version 0.1 is of a message kind, all later versions of it shall be messages, too.
}.

> A service type defines two unutterable inferior data types:

Author: They are "unutterable inferior types". An unutterable type (also known as [Voldemort type](https://wiki.dlang.org/Voldemort_types)) is a type that cannot be named. I think this is a fairly common slang term, do you think it is unacceptable here?

> A service type defines two unutterable inferior data types:

Reviewer: Ah, no. I somehow missed this slang although I have heard of Voldemort types. I think putting those two words together makes for something that sound like a joke instead of a specification. If we can find a better term then "inferior" I think we could keep unutterable. Let's not have people refer to their carefully crafted data types as "a bunch of inferior crap so bad people can't even bring themselves to talk about it." :)

one for service request object, and one for service response object, in that order.

> The two inferiors are separated by the service response marker (``\verb|---|'') on a separate line.

Author: We already did:

https://github.com/UAVCAN/specification/blob/dc5be8f100bc7ba6b3c87cd557abbbcf303a0c17/specification/dsdl/grammar.parsimonious#L23

This parenthesized sample is not meant to override the syntax specification.

> The two inferiors are separated by the service response marker (``\verb|---|'') on a separate line.

Reviewer: 👍

> The two inferiors are separated by the service response marker (``\verb|---|'') on a separate line.

Author: Can you suggest a specific word?

> The two inferiors are separated by the service response marker (``\verb|---|'') on a separate line.

Reviewer: Actually, it's more useful to start calling service "types" service namespaces or perhaps service tuples? Then these can remain datatypes.

Any data type definition can be supplied with a special directive (section~\ref{sec:dsdl_directives})
indicating that it forms a tagged union.

A tagged union type shall contain at least two field attributes.
A tagged union shall not contain padding field attributes.

The value of a tagged union object is a function of the field attribute which value it is currently holding
and the value of the field attribute itself.

To avoid ambiguity, a data type that is not a tagged union is referred to as a \emph{structure}.

\subsubsection{Alignment and cumulative bit length set}\label{sec:dsdl_composite_alignment_cumulative_bls}

The alignment of composite types is one byte (8 bits)\footnote{%
    Regardless of the content.
    It follows that empty composites can be inserted arbitrarily to force byte alignment
    of the next field(s) at runtime.
}.

Per the definitions given in \ref{sec:dsdl_serializable_alignment_padding},
a serialized representation of a composite type is padded to 8 bits by inserting padding bits
after its last element until the resulting length is a multiple of 8 bits.

Given a set of field attributes, their \emph{cumulative bit length set} is computed

> by evaluating every permutation of their respective bit length sets plus the required padding.

Author: Asymptotic complexity analysis assumes that the argument approaches the infinity, but in our case `n` is guaranteed to be small because data types contain few fields. I think the current performance issues in PyDSDL are rather caused by the implementation rather than specification. Even if it is not the case, I think it is the kind of problem that is safe to shelve until later.

it is desirable to ensure that they can be modified in a way that does not render new definitions
incompatible with their earlier versions.
In this context there are two related concepts:

\begin{description}
    \item[Extent] --- the minimum amount of memory, in bits, that shall be allocated to store the serialized
    representation of the type.
    The extent of any type is always greater than or equal the maximal value of its bit length set.
    It is always a multiple of 8.

    \item[Finality] --- denotes whether a type is \emph{final}.
    A type that is final is non-evolvable and its extent equals the maximal value of its bit length set\footnote{%
        I.e., the smallest possible extent.
    }.
    A type that is not final is also referred to as \emph{delimited}.
\end{description}

The extent is the growth limit for the maximal bit length of the type as it evolves.
The extent should be at least as large as the longest serialized representation of any compatible version of the type,
which ensures that an agent leveraging a particular version can correctly process any other compatible
version due to the avoidance of unintended truncation of serialized representations.

> Serialized representations of evolvable definitions carry additional metadata which introduces a certain overhead.

Reviewer: But only if they are nested, right? There isn't additional meta-data for top-level types.

This may be undesirable in some scenarios, especially in cases where serialized representations of the
definition are expected to be highly compact, thereby making the overhead comparatively more significant.
In such cases, the designer may opt out of the extensibility by declaring the definition final.
Serialized representations of final definitions do not incur the aforementioned overhead.

The related mechanics are described in section \ref{sec:dsdl_serialization_composite_non_final}.

\begin{figure}[H]
    $$
    \overbrace{%
        \underbrace{%
            \blacksquare\blacksquare\blacksquare\blacksquare\blacksquare\blacksquare%
            \blacksquare\blacksquare\blacksquare\blacksquare\blacksquare\blacksquare%
        }_{\substack{\text{Longest serialized} \\ \text{representation}}}%
        \underbrace{%
            \boxtimes\boxtimes\boxtimes\boxtimes\boxtimes\boxtimes\boxtimes\boxtimes%
        }_{\substack{\text{Memory reserve} \\ \text{(none if final)}}}%
    }^{\substack{%
        \text{Extent} \\
        \text{(memory requirement)}
    }}
    $$
    \caption{Serialized representation and extent\label{fig:dsdl_extent}}
\end{figure}

> The default extent of a non-final (delimited) definition is the following function

Reviewer: You're going to have to give the reader a spoiler at this point that there are an additional 32-bits hiding in here as the delimiter header. Without that called out explicitly you find yourself utterly confused at your assertion that the 64 bit structure in your example (for example) takes up 96 bits.

Author: The delimiter header is not involved here. The 96 bits are explained right under the example:

<img width="560" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/3298404/95513469-145f6180-09c3-11eb-80cd-aab794ffb0ac.png">

This may be undesirable in some scenarios, especially in cases where serialized representations of the
definition are expected to be highly compact, thereby making the overhead comparatively more significant.
In such cases, the designer may opt out of the extensibility by declaring the definition sealed.
Serialized representations of sealed definitions do not incur the aforementioned overhead.

The related mechanics are described in section \ref{sec:dsdl_serialization_composite_non_sealed}.

\begin{figure}[H]
    $$
    \overbrace{%
        \underbrace{%
            \blacksquare\blacksquare\blacksquare\blacksquare\blacksquare\blacksquare%
            \blacksquare\blacksquare\blacksquare\blacksquare\blacksquare\blacksquare%
        }_{\substack{\text{Longest serialized} \\ \text{representation}}}%
        \underbrace{%
            \boxtimes\boxtimes\boxtimes\boxtimes\boxtimes\boxtimes\boxtimes\boxtimes%
        }_{\substack{\text{Memory reserve} \\ \text{(none if sealed)}}}%
    }^{\substack{%
        \text{Extent} \\
        \text{(memory requirement)}
    }}
    $$
    \caption{Serialized representation and extent\label{fig:dsdl_extent}}
\end{figure}

> The default extent of a non-sealed (delimited) definition is the following function
> of the cumulative bit length set\footnote{Section \ref{sec:dsdl_composite_alignment_cumulative_bls}.}
> of its fields $B$:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Where a non-sealed (delimited) type is defined \emph{without} an explicit extent value a default memory reserve of 50\% is implied using the following function
of the cumulative bit length set\footnote{Section \ref{sec:dsdl_composite_alignment_cumulative_bls}.}
of its fields $B$:
```

Author: > a default memory reserve of 50\% is implied using the following function

I don't like the redundancy here. The 50% overhead is defined in the equation already, why introduce it twice?

Reviewer: I updated my suggestion.
